Comp 97 Senior Capstone Project Proposal

Mission Statement

We plan to improve an existing app aimed at collecting and storing health inform
ation on individual refugees.  We will enable secure data sharing between device
s such that patient information can be quickly and securely retrieved when provi
ded a name and/or fingerprint scan. We hope this system will help doctors effici
ently assist refugees in the field.  We also will create a public database that 
provides statistical insight into the challenges that refugees in different regi
ons face and what resources should be offered to give the most help.
Dean Karen Panetta of the Tufts’ Graduate School of Engineering will be our spon
sor for this project. Dr. Richard Mollica, the Director of the Harvard Program i
n Refugee Trauma (HPRT), approached Dean Panetta about this project, and we will
 work closely with him and his team at the Harvard Medical School.

Problem

When someone enters a refugee camp, they are asked questions about the trauma th
at they have endured so that the doctors in the camp can adequately provide the 
individual with the care that they need, using a series of questions called the 
11 Point Questionnaire. However, these questions can often derail patients who h
ave gone through extensive trauma from their path to recovery by resurfacing pai
nful memories repeatedly. Since medical records are commonly kept in paper form 
at each refugee camp, there is no sharing of data - this means that doctors must
 often spend time and money diagnosing patients who have already been diagnosed 
in previous camps. 
Further, to our knowledge there does not exist any form of accurate statistical 
records of refugee health care.  As a result, there is no objective manner of de
termining what resources should be allocated to a particular area, and in what q
uantities.

One major issue that arises within refugee camps is the practice of human traffi
cking. Women and children are often promised an escape from certain refugee camp
s, only to be sold into the practice of human trafficking.  These groups often t
ravel from camp to camp on their way out of the country.  Sometimes when a refug
ee is being trafficked, a trafficker pretends to be a relative.  Without any way
 to know definitively whether the people are related, a doctor or other personne
l will not know if the trafficker is lying and be unsure of whether or not they 
should intervene.

Context

Currently, there exists a rudimentary version of the system in which doctors are
 able to fill out the 11 Point Questionnaire on their phones using an app, from 
which the information is then emailed to them. This moves the information from p
aper to electronic records, but does not address the issue of sharing patient in
formation between doctors and between camps. The system also does not link patie
nt information to their fingerprints. Further, ambiguity related to language bar
riers or perceived safety has also not been addressed. The added features to the
 system we propose will address these issues to provide a much more seamless del
ivery of healthcare to refugees. 
We also looked closely at the existing application, and we have decided that we 
will need to change the database to one that provides more stability and securit
y than the one they currently use (MongoDB). We hope to speak to the doctors on 
the team soon, and learn more about what the doctors hope to gain from the datab
ase so that we can confirm this choice. 

Customer

We are working with Dean Karen Panetta in aiding Dr. Mollica from the Harvard Me
dical School on the technical aspect of his project.  Dr. Mollica is a specialis
t in refugee trauma, and has put together an 11 point questionnaire that doctors
 in refugee camps use to engage with refugees in the best possible manner.  Dr. 
Mollica wants his tool to reach as many refugees as he can to help them openly d
iscuss health concerns with doctors in refugee camps. Further, Dr. Mollica speak
s in front of the U.N., and wishes to be able to present hard statistical data o
n the wellbeing of people in particular camps or over larger regions to be able 
to form a stronger argument that more aid needs to be given to people in refugee
 camps.

Challenges

Security: If our system is not secure, we cannot deploy.
Responsiveness: Doctors must be able to quickly retrieve/update patient informat
ion, and it must be light-weight enough to function given poor or infrequent net
work connectivity.
Accessibility: All doctors need access to the app and patient information relate
d to anyone who they may have to treat.
Storage: Information should be small/compressible to effectively share data.

We need to ensure that any personally identifiable data is not available in the 
public sphere, while also providing public statistical information on refugee ca
mps as a whole.  This brings up a question of how to both develop a public datab
ase and protect the identity of those involved. We are not sure if HIPAA laws ap
ply to American doctors that are not practicing in the states. This is something
 we would like to speak about with the doctors, so that we can understand the li
mitations that we have. 

Expertise

As a wide-spanning project, we will be in contact with many experts in various f
ields in order to maximize the utility of this project. We will have to learn mo
re about the current state of affairs in many of these refugee camps and more ab
out the nature of medical information to be stored - this information will be pr
ovided by Dr. Mollica and his team. We have been meeting with Dr. Panetta and th
e team from last year to get up to speed quickly on the technical work developed
 over the past year.  We will also have to learn more about how we can keep the 
information secure, likely via Dr. Ming Chow, an expert in security, and how to 
overcome intermittent network accessibility with Dr. Fahad Dogar’s experience. W
e hope to work closely with these professors and doctors so that we have the nec
essary information to make this project as impactful as possible. 


Risks

Once our system is accepted and used by doctors in refugee camps, there is still
 a risk of security breaches. If our system is not as secure as we intend it to 
be, we may cause more problems. In such an event, we’d deny access to any device
s from the servers and continue to use a localized data collection method. 
We also need to make sure that all data is recoverable. If there were a power ou
tage that spontaneously shut off the system, we need to ensure that the data doe
s not disappear.
We further must ensure that personally identifiable information does not become 
public in any manner.

Ethical questions

One ethical issue we must closely analyze is security. We are working with highl
y sensitive medical data that must be kept secure so that patients feel safe to 
share sensitive information with doctors. We will mitigate this issue by keeping
 in close contact with the doctors to understand the nature of this information 
and speaking with experts in the field of security (aka Ming Chow). 
We will likely also be using patient data to develop various models.  We need to
 make sure that we respect privacy by only using absolutely required information
 for the project and protecting identities completely.

Goal

The desired result of this project is software that can identify individuals by 
their fingerprints and retrieve medical information in a secure fashion. Doctors
 should be able to access patient information for individuals in their geographi
cal region, and be able to upload new information when connected to the internet
. The data must be lightweight/compressed such that doctors in areas with poor i
nternet connection can more easily download the data and they are able to store 
large amounts of patient information on their phones and/or laptops. This projec
t will be used in the field, so a successful product would be indicated by an ad
option of the system by doctors in refugee camps. 
This app would also put together statistics to help illustrate the hardships tha
t refugees undergo. This information will be a cumulative data representation of
 the information that is stored into the database. Using these statistics and in
formation, we hope to help doctors gain a broader understanding of what experien
ces their patients have likely endured. These statistics can also be shared with
 the world to inspire humanitarian aid to affected regions. 
In addition, the team hopes to use patient data to detect signs of human traffic
king by finding any abnormalities in recorded refugee movements. These findings 
would be reported to local authorities to help mitigate this highly unethical pr
actice. This is a reach goal - one to be attempted only if we are able to achiev
e every step before. 

Documents

We will create a short video highlighting the capabilities and necessity of the 
app we put together.  This will be the public facing marketing product, and be a
vailable to be viewed anywhere through Youtube.  
We also would like to prepare a more in depth presentation that we can deliver t
o a panel of doctors at the Harvard Medical School and potentially to doctors in
 refugee camps at a conference.  We will likely need to vary the technical depth
 of the presentation based on the technical background of our audience.
We plan to release updates on the development of the project every Friday that s
ummarizes the work that has been done over the previous week.  We will either up
load this on a website blog or on our github page.

